AI_PROMPT_DESIGN.md, before:

# AI Prompt Design for Decision Analysis

This document explains the prompt engineering approach used for the retrospective decision analysis in the AI Decision Justification Tracker.

## Core Principle

The AI analysis focuses on **retrospective learning** rather than predictive modeling. It compares what was expected with what actually happened to extract insights for future decision-making.

## Prompt Structure

The prompt is designed to elicit structured, actionable insights through four key analysis areas:

### 1. Comparison Analysis
Compares expected outcomes with actual outcomes to identify key differences and discrepancies.

### 2. Invalid Assumptions
Identifies which assumptions made during the decision process were proven incorrect by actual events.

### 3. Lessons Learned
Extracts generalizable lessons from the comparison of expectations and reality.

### 4. Reflective Suggestions
Provides actionable suggestions for future similar decisions based on the analysis.

## Prompt Template

```
You are an expert decision analyst. Your task is to perform a retrospective analysis of a decision 
by comparing what was expected with what actually happened. Focus on learning and reflection, 
not prediction.

DECISION DETAILS:
Title: {decision_title}
Context: {decision_context}
Reasoning: {decision_reasoning}
Assumptions Made: {assumptions_list}
Expected Outcome: {expected_outcome}
Actual Outcome: {actual_outcome}
Success Level (1-5): {success_level}
Unexpected Factors: {unexpected_factors_list}

Please provide a structured analysis with the following sections:

1. COMPARISON ANALYSIS:
   Compare the expected outcome with the actual outcome. What were the key differences?

2. INVALID ASSUMPTIONS:
   Identify which assumptions were proven incorrect or invalid based on what actually happened.

3. LESSONS LEARNED:
   What key lessons can be extracted from comparing expectations with reality?

4. REFLECTIVE SUGGESTIONS:
   Based on this analysis, what suggestions would you make for future similar decisions? 
   Focus on reflective improvements, not predictive advice.

Format your response as JSON with the following structure:
{
  "comparison": "Detailed comparison of expectation vs reality",
  "invalidAssumptions": ["List of invalid assumptions"],
  "lessonsLearned": ["List of lessons learned"],
  "suggestions": ["List of reflective suggestions"]
}

Provide concise, actionable insights focused on learning from this specific decision.
```

## Response Parsing

The system expects a JSON response with the following structure:

```json
{
  "comparison": "String describing the comparison between expected and actual outcomes",
  "invalidAssumptions": ["Array of strings identifying invalid assumptions"],
  "lessonsLearned": ["Array of strings listing lessons learned"],
  "suggestions": ["Array of strings with reflective suggestions"]
}
```

## Error Handling

If the AI response cannot be parsed as valid JSON, the system falls back to a default analysis structure to maintain functionality.

## Continuous Improvement

The prompt design can be refined based on:
- Quality of AI analyses received
- User feedback on usefulness of insights
- Domain-specific requirements for different types of decisions

Commit message:

Integrated DeepSeek LLM via Ollama for local AI processing; Updated documentation and added setup guides

AI_PROMPT_DESIGN.md, after:

# AI Prompt Design for Decision Analysis

This document explains the prompt engineering approach used for the retrospective decision analysis in the AI Decision Justification Tracker, now powered by DeepSeek LLM via Ollama.

## Core Principle

The AI analysis focuses on **retrospective learning** rather than predictive modeling. It compares what was expected with what actually happened to extract insights for future decision-making using the DeepSeek LLM.

## Prompt Structure

The prompt is designed to elicit structured, actionable insights through four key analysis areas:

### 1. Comparison Analysis
Compares expected outcomes with actual outcomes to identify key differences and discrepancies.

### 2. Invalid Assumptions
Identifies which assumptions made during the decision process were proven incorrect by actual events.

### 3. Lessons Learned
Extracts generalizable lessons from the comparison of expectations and reality.

### 4. Reflective Suggestions
Provides actionable suggestions for future similar decisions based on the analysis.

## Prompt Template

```
You are an expert decision analyst. Your task is to perform a retrospective analysis of a decision 
by comparing what was expected with what actually happened. Focus on learning and reflection, 
not prediction.

DECISION DETAILS:
Title: {decision_title}
Context: {decision_context}
Reasoning: {decision_reasoning}
Assumptions Made: {assumptions_list}
Expected Outcome: {expected_outcome}
Actual Outcome: {actual_outcome}
Success Level (1-5): {success_level}
Unexpected Factors: {unexpected_factors_list}

Please provide a structured analysis with the following sections:

1. COMPARISON ANALYSIS:
   Compare the expected outcome with the actual outcome. What were the key differences?

2. INVALID ASSUMPTIONS:
   Identify which assumptions were proven incorrect or invalid based on what actually happened.

3. LESSONS LEARNED:
   What key lessons can be extracted from comparing expectations with reality?

4. REFLECTIVE SUGGESTIONS:
   Based on this analysis, what suggestions would you make for future similar decisions? 
   Focus on reflective improvements, not predictive advice.

Format your response as JSON with the following structure:
{
  "comparison": "Detailed comparison of expectation vs reality",
  "invalidAssumptions": ["List of invalid assumptions"],
  "lessonsLearned": ["List of lessons learned"],
  "suggestions": ["List of reflective suggestions"]
}

Provide concise, actionable insights focused on learning from this specific decision.
```

## Response Parsing

The system expects a JSON response with the following structure:

```json
{
  "comparison": "String describing the comparison between expected and actual outcomes",
  "invalidAssumptions": ["Array of strings identifying invalid assumptions"],
  "lessonsLearned": ["Array of strings listing lessons learned"],
  "suggestions": ["Array of strings with reflective suggestions"]
}
```

## Error Handling

If the AI response cannot be parsed as valid JSON, the system falls back to a default analysis structure to maintain functionality.

## Continuous Improvement

The prompt design can be refined based on:
- Quality of AI analyses received from DeepSeek LLM
- User feedback on usefulness of insights
- Domain-specific requirements for different types of decisions

## Implementation Notes

The AI service now integrates with DeepSeek LLM via Ollama's REST API:
- Uses the `/api/generate` endpoint
- Configurable model selection (deepseek-r1 or deepseek-coder)
- Local inference with no external API dependencies
- Structured JSON parsing with fallback mechanisms
